GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: It's
a Super Tuesday sequel. Voters
in five states
head to the polls, as candidates
count on
tonight's results to save or to
seal their
presidential ambitions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Tuesday: As
Russia begins to withdraw forces
from Syria,
we look at the prospects for
peace talks as
that devastating civil war
enters its sixth
year.
GWEN IFILL: And how elite
schools are boosting
student diversity by attracting
military veterans.
NICOLE LEADENHAM, U.S. Veteran:
We're capable
of more than what we have been
pigeonholed
into. So, I think it's important
to know that
we're not just these broken
people coming
back, incapable of succeeding
within society.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Five big states
come to the
fore on this Tuesday night, and
six presidential
candidates are waiting for their
judgment.
It could move front-runners
closer to wrapping
up the races, or give
challengers new life.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
We're going to win. I feel
terrific.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The message was
positive this
morning from John Kasich in
Westerville, Ohio.
The governor is aiming for a
home state win
that slows Republican
front-runner Donald
Trump.
GOV. JOHN KASICH: There were
probably missed
opportunities to get attention
early on, but
by continuing to run the race,
the positive
campaign is now starting to
shine through
like a beacon all over the
country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ohio is one of
five states
going to the polls, along with
Florida, Missouri,
Illinois, and North Carolina. In
all, on the
Republican side, 358 delegates
are up for
grabs.
Trump started the day picking up
nine delegates
in caucuses held in the Northern
Mariana islands
in the Pacific, for a total of
469. Winning
big tonight could give him an
insurmountable
lead toward the 1,237 needed for
the nomination.
That would mean beating Kasich
in Ohio.
And Trump sounded confident
today in a phone
interview with ABC's "Good
Morning America."
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I think we're going to do well
in Ohio for
all of those reasons. Your steel
industry
has died. Your coal industry has
died. I think
we're going to do really well in
Ohio.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, Marco
Rubio is pinning
his remaining hopes on his home
state, Florida,
although recent polls had him
flagging. And
Ted Cruz, with the most
first-place finishes
aside from Trump, has his eyes
on strong showings
in Illinois, Missouri and North
Carolina.
On the Democratic side, Bernie
Sanders began
his day in Illinois. The Vermont
senator is
coming off an upset win in
Michigan, and talked
of achieving similar results
tonight.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
I think that, in the states that
are coming
down the pike, we have great
opportunities
to win many of them. So we're
feeling really
good.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hillary Clinton
was in North
Carolina, where she urged her
supporters to
turn out.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
You know, somebody might say,
well, my candidate
is so far ahead, I don't need to
come out.
Everybody should come out.
There's so much
at stake in this election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clinton is
already more than
halfway to the 2,383 legates
needed for the
Democratic nomination.
We will hear from reporters in
several key
states after the news summary.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: The language
and violence in the presidential
campaign
drew criticism today from both
parties in
Washington. President Obama
spoke at an annual
St. Patrick's Day luncheon.
Without directly mentioning
Donald Trump,
he deplored what he called the
campaign's
vulgar and divisive rhetoric.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
While some maybe more to blame
than others
for the current climate, all of
us are responsible
for reversing it, for it is a
cycle that is
not an accurate reflection of
America, and
it has to stop.
GWEN IFILL: On the Republican
side, Senate
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell
said he spoke
to Trump by telephone about
attacks on protesters
at his rallies.
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader:
We had a good conversation, and
I mentioned
to him that I thought it would
be a good idea
for him, no matter who starts
these violent
episodes, to condemn it and
discourage it.
GWEN IFILL: Trump has rejected
criticism that
he is the one sowing division.
Instead, he
says he's a uniter.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Obama
administration and
its Interior Department, in a
major policy
reversal, today banned oil
drilling in the
Atlantic Ocean. A plan floated a
year ago
would have opened drilling lease
areas off
Virginia, the Carolinas and
Georgia. Today,
the department dropped the plan,
citing local
opposition, plus military and
commercial interests.
GWEN IFILL: Also today, the
administration
eased the trade embargo on Cuba
again, five
days before President Obama
travels to Havana.
The announcement ends the ban on
Cuban access
to international banking. It
also opens the
way for Cubans to play Major
League Baseball
and to relax limits on travel to
Cuba.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hundreds of
migrants who crossed
into Macedonia from Greece
yesterday were
forcibly returned today. The
group of about
700 had bypassed a border fence
and forded
a river to gain entry, but they
were made
to walk back to Greece.
One Syrian woman said she had to
shelter her
children under plastic bags
overnight.
WOMAN (through translator): They
told us walk,
keep walking, they will let us
in, and we
will be done with all the rain
and the cold.
But they didn't let us through.
We got scared
for our children, and up there,
it's very
cold. We didn't have tents or
anything with
us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Other refugees
said they were
beaten and stunned with Tasers
by Macedonian
forces.
GWEN IFILL: The U.S. military
now confirms
a top Islamic State commander
has died after
being severely wounded in
Eastern Syria. Omar
al Shishani, an ethnic Chechen,
was targeted
by a U.S. airstrike on March 4.
A news agency
affiliated with ISIS denied the
report of
his death.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Myanmar,
half-a-century
of military domination formally
ended, as
Parliament elected Htin Kyaw to
be president.
He's a close ally of
pro-democracy leader
Aung San Suu Kyi. Lawmakers
broke into thunderous
applause when the result was
announced. Suu
Kyi says the new president will
act as her
proxy, because she is
constitutionally barred
from the office.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, Washington,
D.C.'s subway system announced
an emergency
shutdown starting at midnight
tonight due
to safety concerns. Officials
ordered an inspection
of all electrical components on
the tracks
after two fires in the last
year. The shutdown
runs at least into early
Thursday morning.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The National
Football League
today backed an executive who's
acknowledged
a link between football and the
brain diseases
like CTE. Yesterday, the NFL's
top health
and safety official said
research -- quote
-- "certainly shows a
connection."
Today, a spokesman said the
comments -- quote
-- "accurately reflect" the
league's view.
GWEN IFILL: And on Wall Street,
the Dow Jones
industrial average gained 22
points to close
above 17250. The Nasdaq fell 21
points, and
the S&P 500 slipped three.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the latest
from today's primaries with the
highest stakes;
Russia's withdrawal and the
Syrian peace process;
the mutual benefits of having
more veterans
on college campuses; and much
more.
Voters got their say in five key
states across
the country today.
For Ohio Governor John Kasich,
today's home
state outcome could determine
whether his
Republican campaign continues.
And on the
Democratic side, Bernie Sanders
is angling
for an upset.
John Yang is at Kasich
headquarters outside
of Cleveland, and he joins us
now with the
latest.
John, in Ohio, we're talking
about 66 delegates
on the Republican side, 143
Democratic delegates
at stake. And yet it seems as if
the Angela
Rye that we have seen throughout
this campaign
is cutting across both parties.
JOHN YANG: That's exactly right,
Gwen.
You know, we're in the field
house at Baldwin
Wallace University, and in
another part of
the building, there is voting
going on. It's
a polling place. I talked to
some of the voters
there, and some of the
Democratic supporters
of Bernie Sanders are expressing
the same
sorts of things you hear at
Donald Trump rallies.
They feel that the establishment
has failed
them. They aren't getting sort
of the attention
or the benefits that they want
from the government.
It's sort of the flip side of
it. I talked,
for instance, to 29-year-old Joe
Dukonowski
(ph). He is a software engineer.
He told me
he makes about $90,000 a year,
but because
he owes almost as much or
actually a little
bit more in student loans, he
feels he can't
buy a house.
He has health insurance, but the
deductible
is so high, he feels he can't
afford to get
sick and go to a doctor. He says
he's going
to be paying off those student
loans for so
long that once the loans are
paid off, he's
going to have to start saving
for retirement
then. He feels that the system
has not helped
him.
He says he feels he's too rich
for the Democrats
to worry about, too poor for the
Republicans
to worry about him. We heard
much the same
thing from Christine Hamlet
(ph), a young
woman who went to college to be
a teacher.
Unable to find a teacher's job,
she's working
as an insurance agent. She says
she wanted
to be a teacher, can't find a
job, and now
she's going to be paying for it
for the rest
of her life.
She voted for Bernie Sanders,
too, but she
was voting today because she
didn't think
she was going to be able to vote
for him in
November because she thinks the
deck is stacked
against him and that Hillary
Clinton will
get the nomination -- Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Briefly, John, do
you see any
sign of a stop Trump movement on
the ground?
JOHN YANG: There is some of that
in some interesting
ways.
I talked -- one of the voters I
talked to
was a lifelong Democrat who took
a Republican
ballot today for the first time
in 42 years
of voting. He said he's a
Democrat, but he
wanted to vote for John Kasich
to try to stop
Donald Trump. He said it's first
time he ever
asked for a Democratic ballot. I
asked him
how it felt.
He said he felt his father
spinning in his
grave -- Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: And you talked to
John Kasich
briefly today at the polling
place. Do you
have a sense that this is do or
die, that
he thinks it's do or die for
him?
JOHN YANG: Oh, he knows that if
he doesn't
pull it out today, it's all over
for him.
He talked about the pride he
felt as a boy,
as a young man, as a man from a
small town
in Pennsylvania voting for
himself today for
president.
He also said that he is still
proud of the
fact that he ran this positive
campaign, the
bite you heard earlier. He knows
he missed
some opportunities for
attention, but he does
say that, if he goes on, he's
going to be
harsher and tougher on what he
calls the very
disturbing rhetoric of Donald
Trump on minorities
and on women -- Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: John Yang doing
great work out
there for us, we will talk to
you again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Florida is a
make-or-break
moment for Senator Marco Rubio's
campaign.
Meanwhile, Hillary Clinton is
expected to
continue her Southern sweep with
a win the
state.
Joining us from Tallahassee is
Matt Dixon.
He's Florida bureau chief for
Politico.
So, Matt, first of all, the
Republicans. Why
does Donald Trump seem to be
doing so well
in Florida?
MATT DIXON, Politico: Well, I
think the -- sort
of the feel that we have seen
nationally in
previous early states is
absolutely showing
up here in Florida.
One of the -- the sort of best
numbers to
exemplify that going into
Election Day, about
1.1 million Republicans had
voted by mail
or early voting; 23 percent of
those, nearly
a quarter of that, had not voted
in the past
three elections or the past
three primaries.
So, the electorate is expanding.
And folks who have not
historically voted
are voting in fairly large
numbers here. And
I think that speaks well for
Trump and certainly
to a lesser extent Senator Cruz.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
Matt, what
do voters say to you about why
Donald Trump?
MATT DIXON: I feel the same sort
of sentiment
that we just heard from Ohio is
very much
evident here as well.
There's large pockets of the
state -- South
Florida, which is kind of a
stronghold for
Senator Rubio, might have a bit
less of this,
but in large sort of northern
swathes of conservative
North Florida, there's the same
sort of sentiment.
It's the anti-establishment
stuff really bubbling
over.
The past few election cycles, we
have kind
of heard about it, this idea
that the establishment
or those who sort of run the
political class
are mad, but we hadn't seen it
sort of personified
at the polls the way we are this
year.
And, in Florida, that's
certainly the case.
Donald Trump has a very large
lead. There's
been a few outliers that have
had him beating
Marco Rubio by just seven or
eight points.
But those are outliers. He's had
some pretty
large leads in all recent polls,
and a lot
of the things that we have been
hearing about
for a while now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, conversely,
why home state
boy Marco Rubio not doing any
better than
he is?
MATT DIXON: Well, it's -- I
think he's kind
of gotten caught up in the wave.
To begin with, there was --
before Senator
Rubio got in, there were some
people who didn't
think this was his year. When
Jeb Bush was
running, there was a lot of
people who were
skeptical he was even going to
get in and
challenge him. And then, once he
did, he's,
I think, topped a lot of
people's expectations.
And it's just that he got caught
up, like
a lot of other folks, including
Governor Bush
did, in sort of this Trump
anti-establishment
wave. And he's got a few
positive signs here,
and he needs a good showing. One
of the things
going into Election Day, the
Hispanic portion
of the electorate here is voting
2 percent
-- 2 to 3 percent higher than it
has in the
Marco Rubio.
But it's not going to be enough,
more than
likely. And if the electorate is
doing what
it looks like it's going to do
in probably
a record turnout, he might
actually finish
third place to Ted Cruz.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Whoa.
MATT DIXON: He's going to have a
difficult
time certainly winning.
And, right now, it's -- he's
going to be fighting
for third, because it's looking
to be record
turnout here in Florida, which
might not be
a great sign for him, because
it's a lot of
new voters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just very
quickly -- and
we don't -- we're out of time --
but Hillary
Clinton seems to be in pretty
comfortable
shape.
And we are going to have to
leave it there.
Matt Dixon, reporting for us,
thanks very
much.
MATT DIXON: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: For both the
Republican and the
Democratic candidates, the
stakes are especially
high and uncertain in Illinois.
For that, we turn to Amanda
Vinicky, statehouse
bureau chief for Illinois Public
Radio and
WUIS. She joins us from Chicago.
We're talking about 69 GOP
delegates up for
stake in Illinois tonight. But
there is so
much uncertainty about what's
happening there.
AMANDA VINICKY, Illinois Public
Radio: Yes,
there is a lot of uncertainty.
So, you had early on Donald
Trump ahead in
the polls. Of course, we had
that big Chicago
rally. That wasn't necessarily
an area where
he was expected to do well when
he was here
in Chicago on Friday of last
week. He was
walking really into a hotbed of
activism right
there, but that, of course,
doesn't seem to
bother his supporters any.
They love that he isn't
concerned about P.C.
And he did have a very
well-attended rally
about 150 miles to the south of
Chicago in
Bloomington just days later. The
only problem
there was that so many people
attended, apparently,
a local cemetery nearby became a
parking lot.
And that, of course, got some
locals angry.
Nonetheless, we have seen Ted
Cruz rising
in the polls here, and that's
largely expected
to be because down-state
Illinois really is
more that typical evangelist,
God fearing,
rural country. And it may be
that they're
turning there.
Also, Illinois already has sort
of swept into
what Donald Trump is selling
with our current
governor, Bruce Rauner, who
campaigned that
he was a successful businessman
who couldn't
be bought and he self-funded his
own campaign.
But Illinois is in its ninth
month without
a budget, and that's really
hurting down-state.
So that may be also what is
turning down-state
voters toward Cruz instead of
Donald Trump.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about the
Democratic
side, because we talked about
how Marco Rubio's
home state is Florida. John
Kasich's home
state is Ohio.
And now we have Hillary
Clinton's home state
of Illinois, which people
forget, but it's
not -- this is not a slam dunk
for her.
AMANDA VINICKY: No. And it was
largely expected
to be. And early polls had that.
She is a
hometown girl, and she really
does have most
of the Illinois Democratic
leaders, that power
base of the Chicago, Cook County
-- quote,
unquote -- "machine" behind her.
So, it would be huge for both
those leaders,
as well as, of course, for
Hillary Clinton
if she were to lose. She had her
husband,
Bill Clinton, working the polls
in Chicago
this morning. But also this
morning, Bernie
Sanders was at a very popular
Chicago restaurant,
and he's doing all he can to
drum up support.
GWEN IFILL: Bernie Sanders, in
addition to
talking about trade a lot in
these Midwestern
states, Missouri as well, which
votes tonight,
has also been bringing attention
to her ties
to the mayor of Chicago, who is
not as popular
as he once was, to put it
mildly.
AMANDA VINICKY: To put it
mildly, you're right.
This gets back to what I said,
that kind of
hotbed of activism that Donald
Trump had walked
into in Chicago.
There are still a lot of angry,
particularly
progressives and liberals, about
a video that
showed Chicago police shooting
16 times a
black teenager. And there is a
belief that
Mayor Emanuel glossed over that,
and had that
come out before his mayoral
election, somebody
who has been campaigning with
Bernie Sanders
-- that's County Commission Chuy
Garcia -- that,
well, we may have a different
mayor of Chicago
right now.
So, yes, Bernie Sanders is doing
all he can
to bring Chuy Garcia out on the
campaign trail
with him, and that has led to a
whole lot
of applause at these Chicago
rallies.
GWEN IFILL: Amanda Vinicky of
Illinois Public
Radio and WUIS, thank you.
AMANDA VINICKY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now to North
Carolina,
where Donald Trump leads in the
polls by double
digits. Despite controversy
surrounding his
campaign, he continues to
attract strong support.
We talked to one family with
differing politics
spanning three generations to
hear why they're
going all in for Trump.
GRACE TILLY, Donald Trump
Supporter: This
is my first time voting. Being
33, that's
kind of crazy, but it says a
lot.
FARRON TILLY, Donald Trump
Supporter: I'm
actually a registered Democrat,
but I'm voting
for Trump this time.
PETE TILLY, Donald Trump
Supporter: This is
my first time I have ever worked
on political
campaign. My family members are
joining me,
my son, my daughter-in-law, and
my grandchild.
It's been such an awesome
experience.
And, father God, we just thank
you that you're
going to use Donald Trump for
your glory in
your kingdom, oh, father God.
MAN: Amen.
PETE TILLY: My biggest point is,
if you want
to be here, conform to the
country. If you
don't want to be here, go home.
I was born
in Montreal, Canada. And when I
started school,
for us, we were told, look, you
either speak
English or you're not going to
pass your class.
And in today's society, it's
like we cater
to the people, whatever language
they speak.
I came in the States, I joined
the military,
and then I even went and got
naturalized,
and I'm very proud to say I'm an
American
citizen.
GRACE TILLY: Hello. My name is
Grace. And
I'm a volunteer for Donald
Trump's presidential
campaign here in North Carolina.
Fayetteville is a very big
military town with
Fort Bragg being right there. My
father-in-law
and my husband are both
veterans, and the
whole idea of the care of the
veterans being
subpar is very true. My whole
family is supporting
Trump, down to my 11-year-old.
BOY: No other candidate stands
up for Americans
like Donald Trump.
GRACE TILLY: It was both our
idea for him
to stay home from school today,
so that he
can see democracy in action.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Do we love North Carolina? Do we
love it?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: Beautiful.
Beautiful.
GRACE TILLY: I definitely think,
with Trump's
business savvy, his mind, I
think that he's
going to be the best one that's
going to be
able to help us.
Our family has been impacted in
a very big
way by the recession. We
definitely at times
are living paycheck to paycheck.
And my husband
is having hard time finding work
as well.
FARRON TILLY: It hurts my pride.
I'm a person
that is used to being able to
take care of
my family. One of my biggest
goals in life
is to give my children an easier
life than
my own, send them to college,
get them good
degrees.
And right now, with what I'm
making and how
little I'm working, I don't know
if I'm going
to be able to do that.
DONALD TRUMP: We built a massive
company.
Oh, no. Get out of here. Go home
to mom.
PETE TILLY: All these protesters
and all this
stuff, and people saying he's
racist, and
then the Black Lives Matter, you
know what?
Red lives matter, because, when
you bleed,
we all bleed red.
MITT ROMNEY (R), Former
Presidential Candidate:
He cheers assaults on
protesters. This is
the very brand of anger that has
led other
nations into the abyss.
GRACE TILLY: What Mitt Romney is
doing is
only solidifying our reasons why
we love Donald
Trump, why we're going to vote
for him.
PETE TILLY: Donald Trump is on
point when
he says this is for the people,
this is not
for him, that he represents the
people, and
without his people, he wouldn't
have nothing.
So, now we're ready for another
day of riding
and going out and helping Donald
Trump.
GWEN IFILL: You can follow all
of today's
races on our live results page
and on our
home page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today marks five
years since
the armed uprising in Syria
began, before
it turned into a full-blown
civil war. And
this grim anniversary was marked
with significant
diplomatic and military moves.
We start with some background
from chief foreign
affairs correspondent Margaret
Warner.
MARGARET WARNER: A hero's
welcome awaited
the first Russian pilots to
return home from
their air campaign in Syria.
They flew out
of Syria hours after President
Vladimir Putin's
surprise announcement that the
main part of
Russia's several thousand forces
would withdraw.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through
translator): I believe that the
goal set out
to the Ministry of Defense and
the armed forces
has in large part been
fulfilled, and that's
why I ordered the minister of
defense to start
the pullout.
MARGARET WARNER: Moscow has said
its six months
of intensive bombing was aimed
at Islamic
State forces. But, by all
accounts, the principal
targets were Western-backed and
other rebels
fighting the government of
Bashar al-Assad.
In Geneva today, site of talks
to resolve
the conflict politically,
opposition leaders
welcomed the Russian decision.
SALIM AL-MUSLAT, High
Negotiations Committee:
If they are serious about
pulling out all
these -- this will be an end to
dictatorship.
It will be an end to crimes in
Syria, and
it will help us to put an end to
terrorism
there in Syria.
MARGARET WARNER: Syrian
officials, meanwhile,
insisted Putin's move was made
in full coordination
with the Assad government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Margaret
joins me now.
So, Margaret, U.S. officials
think this is
for real, this pullout, and do
they think
it's significant?
MARGARET WARNER: Yes, they do,
Judy, surprisingly,
given all the distrust.
They had no advanced private
notice from the
Russians about this, but there
was an Obama-Putin
phone call scheduled for 3:00 in
the afternoon
here. And they actually do think
it's for
real.
And what they look at is how it
was ballyhooed
in Russia. They broke into the
dinnertime
television hour. He proclaimed
the troops
were coming home and victory.
And one of the
headlines in Russia even said
"Mission Accomplished,"
which is, of course, perhaps
rueful.
Secondly, Russia had reached a
fork in the
road militarily, because their
theory had
been use airstrikes, and then
have Syrian
forces take ground. The Syrian
forces didn't
turn out to be quite competent
enough, so
Putin was facing a choice: Does
Russia put
in ground forces? Didn't want to
get into
that quagmire.
And then, number three, of
course, Putin -- on
the eve of the Syria peace
talks, Putin has
achieved what he really wanted,
which was
to be seen as a major player in
the Middle
East that has to be reckoned
with, number
two, and, two, to establish that
there wouldn't
be another leader anywhere in
his neighborhood
that would be removed by force
by Western-backed
forces.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, why do the
sources you
have been -- I know you have
been talking
to Americans and Russians. Why
do they think
he did this and why right now?
MARGARET WARNER: They think he
did this right
now because of the talks
beginning right now,
and that they wanted to send a
message to
Assad that, look, we have come
in, we have
helped you.
As one official said, they're
trying to let
Assad know, you have got a
check, but it's
not a blank check. There's a
number in it.
And you have to get realistic at
the talks.
And the foreign minister of
Syria just said
last week, oh, a red line for
us, there's
no discussion of any change in
government
or that Assad might go. And they
were just
saying, whoa, boy, we're not
going to be watching
your back that way.
So, I think that was the number
one thing.
There is no love loss between
Putin and Assad.
I mean, one of his top officials
has been
quoted as calling him a bastard
and a butcher,
so there was -- not that Putin
acts for sentimental
reasons.
But -- and then, finally, as I
said, he's
been recognized, Putin -- they
think Putin
is ready to do this because he's
been recognized
as a world power and that he
will be now more
interested in cooperating.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I was asking
because people
would say, well, if they're
pulling out, why
did they go in, in the first
place if they
thought Assad was a butcher and
such a bad
actor?
MARGARET WARNER: Well, because
it was preserving
Russian interests. In other
words, there's
the naval base on the
Mediterranean. They
have now been able to also build
an air base.
They're keeping those, by the
way, and they're
keeping troops and planes at
both.
So, the U.S. is going to be
monitoring that
closely. And so they prevented a
leader from
being deposed. And I think that
was the number
one reason.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two other quick
things, Margaret.
Effect on the peace talks?
MARGARET WARNER: Peace talks,
Judy, they're
not wildly optimistic.
One official said to me, it
opens the door
more to some kind of agreement.
But you have
got all those players, as we all
know, the
U.S. and the Europeans and the
Russians and
the Iranians and the opposition
in the Gulf
states.
And it's a real -- as somebody
said to me,
if it were easy, we wouldn't be
here five
years from the start of the
conflict.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just very
quickly, finally,
situation on the ground, where
does this leave
it?
MARGARET WARNER: Basically,
Assad is in a
stronger position. The question
is, can his
forces keep and hold the
territory that the
Russians have cleared open for
them?
They believe the opposition was
badly pounded
by the Russians, so some groups
are intact.
Some are actually in worse
shape. And ISIL,
they -- the U.S. intelligence
believes, has
been slightly weakened, has lost
a little
more territory, but that wasn't
said with
huge confidence.
So, we are really still on a
stalemate on
the ground, and then just hoping
that all
the sides are so tired that they
might be
ready to deal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Margaret Warner,
some terrific
reporting. Thank you.
MARGARET WARNER: Thanks.
GWEN IFILL: Now: offering higher
education
to those who have served.
Many Americans join the military
right out
of high school. And once they
return, some
colleges are now giving them a
chance to learn
at the country's top-tier
schools.
Special correspondent Jackie
Judd reports
for our weekly education series,
Making the
Grade.
JACKIE JUDD: This was the
classroom that taught
Nicole Leadenham the lessons of
war during
deployments in Iraq and
Afghanistan.
NICOLE LEADENHAM, U.S. Veteran:
I left for
basic training 10 hours after I
graduated
high school. So that was going
to be what
I was going to do.
JACKIE JUDD: Today, this is the
34-year old's
classroom, Vassar College in New
York's Hudson
Valley.
NICOLE LEADENHAM: I think that
this is the
time that I was meant to be
here, at this
stage in my life. I can really
take advantage
of the academics and, you know,
learning.
JACKIE JUDD: Leadenham, a junior
and one of
30 post-9/11 vets at Vassar, is
here because
president Catharine Hill wanted
to somehow
close the education gap between
young people
who go off to elite campuses
like this one
and those who enlist and go off
to fight the
wars.
CATHARINE BOND HILL, President,
Vassar College:
More of the young men and women
who are enlisting
are coming from lower
socioeconomic backgrounds.
And it just seems to me that
part of the reward
or the return for doing that is
that they
get access to education when
they come back.
JACKIE JUDD: Did you feel that
this grateful
nation notion, was it words and
not action?
CATHARINE BOND HILL: I think the
evidence
absolutely suggested that it was
words and
not action.
JACKIE JUDD: The Veterans
Administration says
more than one million vets are
using G.I.
benefits. Most attend public or
for-profit
schools. The number at top-tier
colleges and
universities is so small, it is
not even known.
A few years back, Vassar
invested in a campaign
to attract veterans to apply.
None did, even
though their education would
have been fully
paid for. So, the college turned
to the Posse
Foundation, which is expert at
reaching nontraditional
students.
For 25 years, it's been sending
groups, or
posses, of students to elite
colleges, students
with academic and leadership
potential who
don't fit the mold.
Founder Debbie Bial thought the
same model
would work for veterans.
DEBBIE BIAL, Founder, Posse
Foundation: Posse
is about helping the top
colleges and universities
think about how to build a
diverse student
body, how to get as rich a
dialogue going
on campus as they possibly can,
how to create
community and build bridges
across the various
communities on campus. It made
sense to us
to include a piece of our
population that
served the country.
MICHAEL SMITH, U.S. Veteran: I
think it's
going to allow for the
trajectory of my life
to be more vertical, by virtue
of being here.
JACKIE JUDD: Posse veteran
Michael Smith,
who grew up on Chicago's South
Side, is a
sophomore at Wesleyan University
in Middletown,
Connecticut. That school joined
the program
two years ago.
MICHAEL SMITH: By virtue of the
educational
experience I'm getting, by
virtue of the skills
I'm developing, and by virtue of
the resources
that are -- that I just wouldn't
have had
access to.
JACKIE JUDD: Before arriving on
campus, the
veterans go through a kind of
boot camp in
New York City. It is four weeks
of preparing
for rigorous academics, learning
how to craft
a college term paper, and
team-building, so
the veterans know that, once
they get here,
they have a circle of support if
they need
it.
But there are still hurdles.
Leadenham needed
to brush up on some old,
forgotten skills.
NICOLE LEADENHAM: I had problems
with knowing
how to study. It's a very
tangible skill that
I didn't have anymore, and I
couldn't even
remember how I had done it
before. So, I had
gone to my professors' office
hours, stuff
like that, being like, how can I
better absorb
the material?
JACKIE JUDD: Another Vassar vet,
Eduardo De
La Torre, lives off campus with
his young
family. As the leader of a
first-responder
medical unit in Iraq, he
frequently faced
life-and-death situations. With
that past
experience and his current
family obligations,
he admits that mixing with other
younger students
can be awkward.
EDUARDO DE LA TORRE, U.S.
Veteran: They're
like, yes, we're going to do a
study group
today. I will text you later.
And the next
thing you know, you're getting a
text at midnight:
"Hey, we're going to go meet up
at the retreat
to go study for like an hour
over this."
So, it's been difficult building
relationships
with the students.
JACKIE JUDD: Wesleyan sophomore
Bryan Stascavage
found himself in the middle of a
full-throated
culture clash on the very
liberal campus.
Stascavage, an Iraq War veteran
and a conservative,
was vilified after writing a
column for the
college newspaper critical of
Black Lives
Matter.
BRYAN STASCAVAGE, U.S. Veteran:
The veterans
that live here at the house with
me looked
at me wide-eyed like, what did
you do, what
did you write?
And I knew that the articles
that I were writing
were not the prevailing opinion
on campus.
And I knew that it was only a
matter of time
when, I like to say that I
connect with a
beehive.
MICHAEL ROTH, President,
Wesleyan University:
Unlike a fighting unit, where
you really need
cohesion and you all have to
point in the
same direction, at a university,
you can afford
dissent and controversy, as long
as you learn
to listen while that's going on.
JACKIE JUDD: Though difficult in
the moment,
Wesleyan president Michael Roth
says the episode
ultimately was good for the
community.
MICHAEL ROTH: That's what you
want, because,
if you're learning to listen,
you're learning
to learn.
JACKIE JUDD: It became a
teachable moment.
MICHAEL ROTH: It became a very
BRYAN STASCAVAGE: I don't want
to be in an
environment where everybody
thinks the same
as me, because you just don't
learn that way.
EDUARDO DE LA TORRE: I think the
military
is stereotypically seen as
something very
conservative, and being in a
very liberal
campus, you can feel shut off,
and you can
feel like my voice isn't going
to be accepted
here, and it's not going to be
heard.
JACKIE JUDD: Still, many of the
younger, more
traditional students clearly
appreciate being
exposed to the experience and
world view of
their ex-military classmates.
MAGGIE KENNEDY, Vassar College:
I think it's
great because it gives a lot of
different
perspectives, especially at a
liberal school,
where a lot of people maybe not
pro-military,
per se.
YANIV YAFFE, Vassar College:
It's easy to
in a class criticize American
foreign policy,
for example. You know, we're so
distant from
things like Iraq and
Afghanistan, but when
you have a soldier who has been
there, it
really changes the conversation.
EDUARDO DE LA TORRE: A student
came up to
me and they said, "I really
appreciate you
talking about that, because your
service reminded
me of my grandfather, and he was
a World War
II vet, and it was really hard
for him to
talk about anything. And it just
made me really
appreciate your service and what
you did for
me."
That's a meaningful gesture.
JACKIE JUDD: A thousand veterans
applied to
Posse for the 30 slots in the
next freshman
class, which, along with
Wesleyan and Vassar,
will include Dartmouth College
in New Hampshire.
Posse's Debbie Bial expects
that, in five
years, about a dozen private
liberal arts
colleges will be a part of the
program, giving
other vets opportunities they
never would
have imagined, while also
bringing their hard-won
perspective to campuses
previously shut off
to military culture. The
veterans also say
the program has something to
teach the entire
country.
NICOLE LEADENHAM: We're capable
of more than
what we have been pigeonholed
into. So, I
think it's important to know
that we're not
just these broken people coming
back, incapable
of succeeding within society.
JACKIE JUDD: A Vassar education
has given
Leadenham the confidence to plan
for a future
that includes helping other
veterans find
their own way back from the war.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Jackie Judd
in Poughkeepsie, New York.
JUDY WOODRUFF: March Madness has
arrived,
and, once again, the University
of North Carolina
is very much in the hunt for a
national title.
A new book has a
behind-the-scenes look at
the school's unique history
under a coaching
legend, and two rivals who
became legends
in their own right.
Jeffrey Brown has that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Three
universities within 25
miles of one another and a rich
basketball
history of rivalries, great
victories and
bitter defeats and lasting
friendships.
Three men are at the heart of
the tale, Dean
Smith, the Hall of Fame coach of
the University
of North Carolina for 36
seasons, who died
last year, Jim Valvano, the
fun-loving, wise-cracking
coach who led North Carolina
State to a surprise
national championship in 1983,
and died of
cancer 10 years later, and Mike
Krzyzewski,
coach at Duke since 1980, winner
of five national
championships, with the most
recent coming
just last year.
Their story is told in the new
book "The Legends
Club."
Author John Feinstein joins me
now.
Welcome, John.
Why these three? What did they
mean to you?
JOHN FEINSTEIN, Author, "The
Legends Club":
well, I cut my teeth as a
reporter covering
for them for The Washington Post
in the 1980s.
They were all there in the
Research Triangle
at the same time. Dean Smith had
been there
since the early '60s, was
already an iconic
figure when Mike Krzyzewski and
Jim Valvano
arrived within nine days of each
other at
Duke and N.C. State.
And I got to know them all very
well. I spent
hours and hours late at night
with Valvano,
with Krzyzewski, not as much
with Dean because
he was more of an introvert, but
probably
spent more time with him through
the years
than anybody in the media.
And as their relationships
evolved, it came
to me much, much later that
there was a remarkable
story to be told.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, this is
partly your personal
story, right, of becoming -- or
starting as
a young student, journalism
student at Duke
up to today.
JOHN FEINSTEIN: Correct.
JEFFREY BROWN: But for those who
don't know
the role of basketball, the role
of these
guys in the state of North
Carolina, what
is it?
JOHN FEINSTEIN: Well, you have
to understand
that, until the mid-1990s, there
were no professional
sports teams in North Carolina.
ACC basketball was king. It
still is, to a
large degree, even though there
are three
professional sports teams in the
state now.
And there were great coaches
going way back
to Everett Case at N.C. State,
Vic Bubas at
Duke, Frank McGuire at North
Carolina. Dean
Smith succeeded Frank McGuire
and built a
dynasty that went on for the 36
years he was
there.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's a story of
friendship,
but it didn't always -- it
certainly didn't
start that way.
JOHN FEINSTEIN: No.
JEFFREY BROWN: There's all these
jealousies,
rivalry, anger, charges of
double standards.
There's a lot of -- and
everything hinges,
of course, on who -- who's
winning.
JOHN FEINSTEIN: Yes.
The irony is that when
Krzyzewski first came
into the league, he resented
Dean Smith because
Dean was the bar. And he did say
there was
a double standard for Dean with
referees,
for Dean's team with referees.
There was one
game where he refused to shake
hands at the
end of the game because he
didn't think the
game was over, that there should
still be
time left on the clock.
And that upset Dean that he
behaved that way.
And at one point, Krzyzewski
even said to
his assistant coaches: "If I
ever start to
act like him, don't ask any
questions. Just
get a gun and shoot me."
Well, years later, he became
Dean. He became
the standard. He became the bar
everybody
was trying to jump over, and he
became the
guy about whom they said there
were double
standards and the refs gave Duke
all the calls.
So, that's when he began to
understand Dean
and respect him more as a
result.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. I mean, they
all ended
up in a kind of pantheon,
especially the two
Dean Smith and Krzyzewski, but
they all flirted
with or felt failure at
different times.
JOHN FEINSTEIN: Absolutely.
And you go back the Dean in the
1960s. In
his fourth season, he was hung
in effigy after
a loss at Wake Forest. And Billy
Cunningham,
who became...
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, that tells
you right
there the role of...
(CROSSTALK)
JOHN FEINSTEIN: Basketball, yes.
And this
was on campus.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
JOHN FEINSTEIN: This was the
students doing
it to him.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. Yes.
JOHN FEINSTEIN: And Billy
Cunningham, who
later became a Hall of Fame
player, was the
one who pulled the effigy down.
Mike Krzyzewski was 38-47 after
three years
at Duke, and there was a night
in Atlanta
when they lost 109-66 to
Virginia in their
last game of the season, when
Tom Butters,
the athletic director who had
hired him, was
literally pushed up against a
wall in a hotel,
with boosters demanding that he
fire this
guy.
Seven years later, he said he
got letters
from those same people when
Krzyzewski was
offered the Celtics job, saying,
pay him anything,
but keep him.
JEFFREY BROWN: There is part of
me that loves
college basketball and college
sports generally,
but wants to push back at you
here.
When we have talked about this
on the program,
it's the rising role of the
coaches, so much
emphasis on the coaches. They
become the most
powerful person in the state in
some cases,
right, at these universities.
And here you are. I want to say,
John, are
you sort of raising them even
higher by focusing
on these three?
JOHN FEINSTEIN: It's a good
question, but
I think these are three who did
it right.
And I don't apologize at all for
saying that
they are good men, in addition
to being great
coaches.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're saying
it's beyond the
winning with these three?
JOHN FEINSTEIN: Absolutely.
Dean Smith helped desegregate
restaurants
in Chapel Hill in the 1950s,
when he was still
an assistant coach, before he
was a star,
before he had power. He went
into a restaurant
with a black member of his
church and basically
dared the management not to
serve them.
Jim Valvano, when he was dying,
started the
V Foundation, helped by
Krzyzewski, who was
in his hospital room almost
every day the
last two months of his life. And
the V Foundation
has raised more than $150
million for cancer
research. Krzyzewski will tell
you, that was
his greatest coaching job.
Krzyzewski has raised millions
and millions
of dollars for charity in North
Carolina and
in Durham. He started the Emily
K Foundation,
named after his mother, which
sends kids with
no money to college. And they
have had something
like 100 college graduates in
the last few
years.
So, they all went beyond the
basketball court.
They're all great coaches, but I
find them
all to be admirable men, and
that's why I
don't have any trouble saying,
yes, I knew
these guys, I spent time with
these guys,
and I learned from these guys.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're writing as
a fan in
an age where there is so much
criticism in
college sports. What do you want
people to
take from this story?
JOHN FEINSTEIN: Well, I don't
want anybody
to think that I'm saying that
there aren't
any problems with big-time
college athletics,
that -- that we're rife with
them right now.
But what I'm trying to say is,
this was a
unique, perfect storm. You had
two of the
four coaches who were on
coaching's Mount
Rushmore, Krzyzewski and Dean
Smith, along
with John Wooden and Bob Knight.
And then you had this third
coach, Valvano,
who has this unique niche
because he won this
amazing national title in 1983,
because, frankly,
of the way he died, the famous
speech -- you
can look it up -- the ESPYs
speech, when he
won the award for courage and
spoke for 11
minutes, when -- and literally
passed out
when he was finished, that
everybody still
looks at to this day.
JIM VALVANO, North Carolina
State Basketball
Coach: And I got one last thing.
I have said
it before, and I'm going to say
it again.
Cancer can take away all my
physical abilities.
It cannot touch my mind. It
cannot touch my
heart. And it cannot touch my
soul.
JOHN FEINSTEIN: I guess the
message of the
book is that these were three
special people,
and the way their relationships
evolved, from
the hostility of the 1980s to
genuine love
at the end of first Jim's life
and then at
the end of Dean's life between
them and Mike
Krzyzewski, I think, is unique
in the pantheon,
as you said, of college
athletics.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right. The
book is "The
Legends Club."
John Feinstein, thanks so much.
JOHN FEINSTEIN: Thanks for
having me, Jeff.
GWEN IFILL: We will be back in
just a moment.
But, first, take this time to
hear from your
local PBS station. It's a chance
to offer
your support, which helps keep
programs like
ours on the air.
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: That brings us to
the "NewsHour"
Shares this evening, something
that caught
our eye that we thought you
would like too.
Lin-Manuel Miranda, creator and
star of the
blockbuster musical "Hamilton,"
scored a White
House first yesterday,
performing a freestyle
rap with the president.
Miranda joined the rest of the
"Hamilton"
cast in meeting with and
performing for high
school students yesterday at the
White House.
But it was the three-man
performance in the
Rose Garden, steps from the Oval
Office, that
went viral.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Drop the beat.
LIN-MANUEL MIRANDA,
Actor/Writer: He's throwing
up some words. I'm getting to
say some freestyling
that you never heard.
Constitution. The POTUS. I'm
freestyling.
You know this. Obamacare. OK,
I'm looking
up because it was hopeless
before you enacted
that system. The Federalist
Papers, Hamilton
wrote the other 51 and greater.
And Sunny
and Both is canine, is insane,
asinine. Oh,
my gosh, I'm freestyling down
the line.
NASA, I want to see if we can
get over to
Mars and rap more bars. I spit
bars, and leave
a carbon footprint up on it, and
lower my
emissions. And this is Lin-Man
freestyling.
And Congress is the
transmission. I hope that
Congress works to our agenda.
Innovation's
important. You really got to
center yourself
and create something.
We need a new justice for the
Supreme Court.
In short, oh, my gosh, this is
my book report.
And, immigrants, we get the job
done. This
so fun. POTUS is holding up the
signs. I'm
not done. It's the Oval Office.
Oh, my gosh, I can't believe I'm
there. It's
so much more intimidating than
if it was square.
Opportunity knocks, and I can't
stop. I'm
here with the president and my
pops.
And, yo, the mic drops.
GWEN IFILL: Yo, the mic drops.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: I'm a crazy
"Hamilton" fan, so
that
is fun for me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I can't wait to
see it.
GWEN IFILL: Oh, got to.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday: how the
presidential campaign
shapes up after today's voting.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Yo, the mic drops.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.